Creating a Hand Gesture Volume Controller using Python and Pycharm (#5878)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: content/articles/creating-a-hand-gesture-volume-controller-using-python-and-pycharm/index.md

```bash
pip install pycaw
```
We'll need this library to access the device's speaker and its master volume.

```bash
pip install python-math
```
We'll use this library to find the distance between point number `4` (the thumb) and point number `8` (the index finger) using hypotenuse.

```bash
pip install gpib-ctypes, comtypes
```
`pycaw` depends on these two libraries. `Ctypes` provides `C` language compatible data types. `Comtypes` bases on the `ctypes` **FFI**(Foreign Function Interface) library.

Now, let's start coding. In the `main.py` file that *pycharm* automatically creates for you, type in the following code:

### Step 1: Importing the libraries we will need
```python
import cv2
import mediapipe as mp
from math import hypot
from ctypes import cast, POINTER
from comtypes import CLSCTX_ALL
from pycaw.pycaw import AudioUtilities, IAudioEndpointVolume
import numpy as np
```
In the above code segment, we are importing each library we installed in our project.

```python
cap = cv2.VideoCapture(0) 
```
We then get the video input from our computer's primary camera. If you are using any other camera, replace the number `0` with that of the camera you are using.

>  Lets now detect, initialize and configure the hands in the video input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's now detect, initialize and configure the hands in the video input.
```

### Step 2: Detecting, initializing, and configuring the hands
```python
mpHands = mp.solutions.hands
hands = mpHands.Hands()
mpDraw = mp.solutions.drawing_utils
```

> In the above code, we are calling on the `mediapipe` hand module to detect the hands from the video input we got from our primary camera. `MpHands.Hands()` then completes the initialization and configuration of the detected hands. We finally draw the *connections* and *landmarks* on the detected hand using `mp.solutions.drawing_utils`. 

Reviewer: Please replace, 'In the above code', with 'In the code above'. It sounds more grammatically correct. Go through your entire tutorial and edit accordingly.

 
### Step 3: Accessing the speaker using pycaw
```python
devices = AudioUtilities.GetSpeakers()
interface = devices.Activate(IAudioEndpointVolume._iid_, CLSCTX_ALL, None)
volume = cast(interface, POINTER(IAudioEndpointVolume))
```
These are the initializations we need for `pycaw` to run smoothly. The developer provides this library together with the initializations. We are not going to change anything. You can find the documentation [here](https://github.com/AndreMiras/pycaw).

> ### Step4: Finding the volume range between the minimum and maximum volume

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 4: Finding the volume range between the minimum and maximum volume
```

```python
while True:
    success, img = cap.read()
    imgRGB = cv2.cvtColor(img, cv2.COLOR_BGR2RGB)
    results = hands.process(imgRGB)
```
The above code checks whether the camera we have specified works. If it works, we will capture an image. We then convert the image to `RGB` and complete the processing of the converted image.

We now need to check whether we have multiple hands in the image we captured.

### Step 6: Checking whether we have multiple hands in our input
```python
lmList = []
if results.multi_hand_landmarks: 
```
This code creates an *empty list* that will store the list of elements of the hands detected by the `mediapipe` hand module, i.e., the number of points on the hand. It also checks whether the input has multiple hands.

We will now create a for loop to manipulate each hand present in the input.

### Step 7: Creating a for loop to manipulate each hand
```python
for handlandmark in results.multi_hand_landmarks:
    for id, lm in enumerate(handlandmark.landmark):
        h, w, c = img.shape
        cx, cy = int(lm.x * w), int(lm.y * h)
        lmList.append([id, cx, cy]) 
    mpDraw.draw_landmarks(img, handlandmark, mpHands.HAND_CONNECTIONS)
```

> - In the code above, we are using the first for loop to interact with each hand in the results. We are then using the second for loop to get the `id` (id number) and `lm` (landmark information) for each handlandmark. The landmark information will give us the `x` and `y` coordinates. The id number is the number assigned to the various hand points.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In the code above, we use the first for loop to interact with each hand in the results. We use the second for loop to get the `id` (id number) and `lm` (landmark information) for each hand landmark. The landmark information will give us the `x` and `y` coordinates. The id number is the number assigned to the various hand points.
```

- `lmList.append([id, cx, cy])`: we will then use this line to add the values of `id`,`cx` and `cy` to `lmList`.

-  We will finally call *mpDraw.draw_landmarks* to draw all the landmarks of the hand using the last line of code.

### Step 8: Specifying the points of the thumb and middle finger we will use
```python
if lmList != []:
    x1, y1 = lmList[4][1], lmList[4][2]
    x2, y2 = lmList[8][1], lmList[8][2]
```
In the code above, we specify that the number of elements in `lmlist` should not be null. We are then assigning variables `x1` and `y1` the `x` and `y` coordinates of point `4` respectively. This is the tip of the thumb. We then repeat the same for the index finger in the last line.

Refer to the hand image diagram we discussed to identify the [points](#referral-hand-image).

### Step 9: Drawing a circle between the tip of the thumb and the tip of the index finger
```python                                            
       cv2.circle(img, (x1, y1), 15, (255, 0, 0), cv2.FILLED)  
       cv2.circle(img, (x2, y2), 15, (255, 0, 0), cv2.FILLED)  
```

> The above code draws a circle at the tip of the thumb and at the tip of the index finger.
> - ` (x1, y1)`specifies that we will draw the circle at the tip of the thumb. `15`is the *radius* of the circle. `(255, 0, 0)` is the *color* of the circle. `cv2.FILLED` refers to the thickness of `-1` pixels which will fill the circle with the color we specify.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above code draws a circle at the tip of the thumb and the tip of the index finger.
- ` (x1, y1)` specifies that we will draw the circle at the tip of the thumb. `15`is the *radius* of the circle. `(255, 0, 0)` is the *color* of the circle. `cv2.FILLED` refers to the thickness of `-1` pixels which will fill the circle with the color we specify.
```

- We will repeat the same for the index finger in the line of code: 

### Step 10: Drawing a line between points 4 and 8
```python
cv2.line(img, (x1, y1), (x2, y2), (255, 0, 0), 3)
```

> In the code above, we use the `cv2.line` function to draw a line between point four of the hand and point `8`. The line will connect point `4` (`(x1, y1)`) which is the tip of the thumb, and point `8` (`(x2, y2)`) which is the tip of the index finger. `(255, 0, 0)` is the color of the line and `3` is its thickness.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the code above, we use the `cv2.line` function to draw a line between point four of the hand and point `8`. The line will connect point `4` (`(x1, y1)`), which is the tip of the thumb, and point `8` (`(x2, y2)`), which is the tip of the index finger. `(255, 0, 0)` is the line color and `3` is its thickness.
```

### Step 11: Finding the distance between points 4 and 8
```python
length = hypot(x2 - x1, y2 - y1)
```

> In the code above, we find the distance between the tip of the thumb and the index finger using hypotenuse. We achieve this by calling the math `hypot` function and passing the difference between `x2` and `x1` and the difference between `y2` and `y1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the code above, we find the distance between the tip of the thumb and the index finger using a hypotenuse. We achieve this by calling the math `hypot` function and passing the difference between `x2` and `x1` and the difference between `y2` and `y1`.
```
